Welcome to Vanishing Gradient. After watching this
video, you'll be able to understand the concept of the vanishing gradient
problem and describe the characteristics of the vanishing gradient problem. In this video,
we will discuss a problem with the sigmoid activation function that prevented neural
networks from booming sooner. This problem is the vanishing gradient problem. You may recall from another course video
that with a very simple network of two neurons only, the derivatives of the error with respect
to the weights were as follows. See how small the gradients are, but more importantly,
how small the gradients of the error with respect to W1? Well, it turns out that,
because we're using the sigmoid function as the activation function, all the intermediate
values in the network are between 0 and 1. When we do backpropagation, we multiply
factors that are less than 1 by each other, and their gradients tend to get smaller and
smaller as we move backward in the network. This means that the neurons in the earlier
layers learn very slowly compared to those in the latter layers of the network.
The earlier layers in the network are the slowest to train. The result is a training process that takes
too long and a prediction accuracy that is compromised. Accordingly, we do not use the sigmoid or
similar functions as activation functions since they're prone to the vanishing gradient
problem. In this video, you learned that the problem with the sigmoid activation function
that prevented neural networks from booming sooner is known as the vanishing gradient problem.
In a very simple network of two neurons only, the gradients are smaller, but more importantly,
the gradients of the error with respect to W1 is very small. Because we are using the
sigmoid function as the activation function, then all the intermediate values in the
network are between 0 and 1. When we do backpropagation, we keep multiplying
factors that are less than 1 by each other, so their gradients tend to get smaller and
smaller as we keep moving backwards in the network. Neurons in the earlier layers of the network
learn very slowly compared to the neurons in the later layers. As the earlier layers are
the slowest to train, the training process takes too long, and prediction accuracy is
compromised. And we don't use the sigmoid function or similar functions as activation
functions since they're prone to the vanishing gradient problem.